This File Will contain the fundamentals of IT.

The core components of computer system:

cpu- 
Often dubbed the "brain" of the computer, the CPU is responsible for executing instructions, performing arithmetic, logic, controlling, and input/output (I/O) operations specified by the software. It is a highly complex integrated circuit.

Function: Processes data, performs calculations, and manages overall system operations.
Key Specifications:
Cores: Independent processing units within the CPU. A multi-core CPU can execute multiple instructions simultaneously.
Threads: Virtual components of a CPU core that manage tasks. Each core can often handle two threads (hyper-threading/SMT), improving multitasking.
Clock Speed (GHz): Measures the number of cycles the CPU can execute per second. Higher clock speeds generally mean faster performance, though core count and architecture are equally important.
Cache: Small, fast memory (L1, L2, L3) built directly into the CPU to store frequently accessed data, reducing the need to access slower RAM.
Manufacturers: The primary manufacturers are Intel (e.g., Core i3/i5/i7/i9, Xeon) and AMD (e.g., Ryzen 3/5/7/9, Threadripper, EPYC).
Socket Types: The physical connector on the motherboard where the CPU is installed. CPU and motherboard sockets must be compatible (e.g., LGA 1700 for Intel, AM5 for AMD).
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7aaIhPu9umg

Motherboard
The motherboard, or mainboard, serves as the central communication backbone of the computer. It's a large printed circuit board that connects all the computer's components, allowing them to communicate and receive power.

Function: Provides the electrical connections and logical pathways for all other hardware components to interact.

Key Components:
CPU Socket: Where the CPU is installed.
RAM Slots (DIMM Slots): Where memory modules are inserted.
Chipset: A set of integrated circuits that manages data flow between the CPU, RAM, storage, and peripherals. It acts as a data traffic controller.
Expansion Slots (PCIe Slots): Used for installing expansion cards like graphics cards, sound cards, and network cards. Modern systems primarily use PCI Express (PCIe).
Storage Connectors:
SATA (Serial ATA): For connecting traditional hard drives (HDDs) and 2.5-inch Solid State Drives (SSDs).
M.2 Slots: For connecting high-speed NVMe SSDs, which offer significantly faster performance than SATA.
I/O Panel: Provides external ports for connecting peripherals (USB, Ethernet, audio jacks, video outputs).
Form Factors: Defines the motherboard's physical dimensions and mounting hole layout, influencing case compatibility. Common sizes include ATX, Micro-ATX, and Mini-ITX.

Threads:-
Definition of a Thread (in CPU context)

A thread is the smallest unit of processing that a CPU can handle.
It represents a single sequence of instructions that the CPU executes independently.
In (Simple Terms):-

Think of a core as a worker, and a thread as a task that worker can perform.
Some cores can handle two tasks (threads) at the same time — this is called Hyper-Threading (in Intel CPUs).

(A)How are threads divided to cores, this is an example of intel i5?

| Specification                        | Value |
| ------------------------------------ | ----- |
| **Total Cores**                      | 10    |
| **Performance (P) Cores**            | 2     |
| **Efficient (E) Cores**              | 8     |
| **Low Power Efficient (LP-E) Cores** | 0     |
| **Total Threads**                    | 12    |
⚙️ Thread Distribution Logic:-

Intel’s hybrid architecture (used in 12th, 13th, and 14th gen Core CPUs) divides cores into:

P-cores (Performance cores): Support Hyper-Threading → 2 threads per core

E-cores (Efficient cores): Do not support Hyper-Threading → 1 thread per core
Calculation:-
| Core Type             | # of Cores | Threads per Core | Total Threads    |
| --------------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| Performance (P) Cores | 2          | 2                | **4 threads**    |
| Efficient (E) Cores   | 8          | 1                | **8 threads**    |
| **Total**             | **10**     |                  | **12 threads** ✅ |
Summary:-

So, your Intel Core i5 (most likely a 12th–14th Gen model like i5-13400 or i5-13600) has:

2 P-cores → 4 threads

8 E-cores → 8 threads
Total: 12 threads

Random Access Memory (RAM)
RAM is a form of volatile computer memory that stores data and program instructions currently being used by the CPU. Unlike long-term storage, RAM is extremely fast but loses its contents when the power is turned off.

Function: Provides high-speed, temporary storage for active programs and data, allowing the CPU quick access.
Types: Modern desktop and laptop systems primarily use DDR (Double Data Rate) synchronous dynamic RAM.
DDR4: Common in older systems, still widely used.
DDR5: Newer standard offering higher speeds and bandwidth.
Specifications:
Capacity (GB): The total amount of data RAM can hold (e.g., 8GB, 16GB, 32GB). More RAM generally allows for smoother multitasking and handling of larger applications.
Speed (MHz/MT/s): The rate at which data can be transferred. Higher speeds lead to better performance.
Latency (CL): A measure of the delay between a command being issued and data being retrieved. Lower latency is better.

Storage Devices
Storage devices are responsible for long-term retention of data, applications, and the operating system, even when the computer is powered off.

Function: Non-volatile storage for permanent data.
Types:
Hard Disk Drives (HDDs):
Mechanism: Utilize spinning platters and read/write heads to store data magnetically.
Characteristics: High capacity for a low cost, but slower due to mechanical parts.
Speed: Measured in Revolutions Per Minute (RPM), commonly 5400 RPM or 7200 RPM.
Solid State Drives (SSDs):
Mechanism: Use flash memory (NAND) to store data electronically. No moving parts.
Characteristics: Significantly faster, more durable, and consume less power than HDDs. More expensive per gigabyte.
Interfaces:
SATA SSDs: Connect via SATA III, offering speeds up to 600 MB/s.
NVMe (Non-Volatile Memory Express) SSDs: Connect via PCIe slots (often M.2 form factor), offering much higher speeds (thousands of MB/s) by directly communicating with the CPU.
Hybrid Drives (SSHDs): Combine a small amount of SSD-like flash memory with a traditional HDD to offer a balance of speed for frequently accessed files and large capacity.

Connection Types and their function:-
There are several types of network connections that enable communication between devices, each serving different functions based on speed, reliability, and purpose. 
Ethernet is a wired connection type commonly used in local area networks (LANs), providing high-speed, stable, and secure data transfer. Ethernet is ideal for businesses and environments where reliability is crucial, offering speeds from 100 Mbps to several Gbps.

Wi-Fi, a wireless connection, enables devices to connect to a network without physical cables. It provides flexibility and mobility, making it popular in homes, offices, and public spaces. While Wi-Fi offers convenience, it can be less reliable and slower than Ethernet due to signal interference or distance from the access point.

Bluetooth is a short-range wireless technology primarily used for connecting peripherals like headphones, keyboards, and other devices. It operates over shorter distances, typically up to 10 meters, and is useful for personal device communication rather than networking larger systems.

Fiber-optic connections use light signals through glass or plastic fibers to transmit data at very high speeds over long distances, making them ideal for internet backbones or connecting data centers. Fiber is faster and more reliable than traditional copper cables, but it is also more expensive to implement.

Cellular connections, such as 4G and 5G, allow mobile devices to connect to the internet via wireless cellular networks. These connections offer mobility, enabling internet access from almost anywhere, but their speeds and reliability can vary depending on network coverage.

Each connection type plays a specific role, balancing factors like speed, distance, and convenience to meet the varying needs of users and organizations.

NFC

Near Field Communication (NFC) is a short-range wireless technology that allows devices to communicate and exchange data over very short distances, typically up to 4 inches (10 cm). NFC is commonly used for applications such as contactless payments, electronic ticketing, and data transfer between devices. It operates at a frequency of 13.56 MHz and supports various modes, including peer-to-peer communication, card emulation, and reader/writer modes. NFC enables quick and secure interactions with minimal setup, making it convenient for mobile payments, access control, and sharing information.
Key Features of NFC:

Short Range: Usually up to 4 cm, ensuring secure and intentional communication.

Low Power: Uses very little power, making it ideal for battery-operated devices.

Simple Connection: Devices connect automatically when brought close; no pairing needed like Bluetooth.

Common Uses:

Contactless Payments: Tap your phone or card on a terminal (e.g., Google Pay, Apple Pay).

Data Transfer: Quickly share small files, contact info, etc., between NFC-enabled devices.

Access Control: Key cards and smart locks often use NFC technology.

Public Transport: Many cities use NFC cards or phones for metro/bus access.

Smart Tags: Stickers or objects with embedded NFC chips that trigger actions on smartphones (e.g., turn on WiFi).

1. Contactless Payments

Examples: Google Pay, Apple Pay, Samsung Pay, contactless credit/debit cards.

How it works: NFC-enabled devices emulate a smart card to securely transfer financial data to payment terminals.

🔁 2. Data Transfer & Sharing

Use case: Quickly share contact details, photos, or small files between phones.

Example: Android Beam (now deprecated), but apps like NFC Tools still enable fast transfers.

🚪 3. Access Control & Security

Where it's used:

Office entry badges

Hotel room key cards

Student/employee ID cards

Benefit: Secure, fast authentication with a simple tap.

🚊 4. Public Transport & Ticketing

Examples:

Metro cards (e.g., London's Oyster, Delhi Metro smart card)

Mobile ticketing apps

Advantage: Faster boarding, no need for paper tickets.

🏷️ 5. Smart Tags (NFC Tags)

What they are: Small physical stickers or labels with NFC chips.

Use case: Program tags to trigger actions on a phone like:

Turn on WiFi

Open an app

Set an alarm

Example Apps: NFC Tools, Trigger.

📱 6. Device Pairing

Where used: Bluetooth speakers, headphones, printers.

Benefit: One-tap pairing instead of lengthy setup.

🛍️ 7. Retail & Product Information

Use case: Tap a product label to get more info, warranties, or re-order links.

Example: Smart posters, product authenticity tags.

🏥 8. Healthcare

Use case: Patient wristbands, medical equipment authentication.

Benefit: Fast, secure data access and tracking.

🎮 9. Gaming & Toys

Example: Nintendo Amiibo figures use NFC to unlock content in games.

🚗 10. Automotive Applications

Use case: Car keys (keyless entry), pairing phones with infotainment systems.

🔹 Bluetooth in Cybersecurity
🧠 What is Bluetooth?

Bluetooth is a wireless communication technology used for exchanging data over short distances (typically up to 10 meters) using radio waves. It's widely used in devices like smartphones, headsets, IoT devices, cars, keyboards, and wearables.

⚠️ Security Risks in Bluetooth

Bluejacking

Sending unsolicited messages to Bluetooth-enabled devices.

Mostly harmless but can be used for phishing or social engineering.

Bluesnarfing

Unauthorized access to information on a Bluetooth-enabled device.

Attackers can steal contacts, messages, or files if the device is set to discoverable mode.

Bluebugging

Grants the attacker control of the target device.

They might make calls, send messages, or access internet services secretly.

Bluetooth Impersonation (BIAS)

A vulnerability that allows attackers to spoof legitimate device identities.

Enables unauthorized pairing or access.

Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) Attacks

Intercepting data between two connected Bluetooth devices.

Often exploited during insecure pairing processes.

Denial of Service (DoS)

Flooding the Bluetooth channel to prevent legitimate use.

Can disable or crash Bluetooth services.

🔐 Bluetooth Security Measures

Use Secure Simple Pairing (SSP)
Uses encryption and authentication, especially with numeric comparison or passkey entry.

Turn Off Bluetooth When Not In Use
Reduces exposure and chance of unauthorized access.

Use "Non-Discoverable" or "Invisible" Mode
Makes it harder for attackers to detect your device.

Regular Device Updates
Manufacturers often patch known vulnerabilities.

Use Trusted Devices Only
Don't accept pairing or file transfer requests from unknown sources.

Application-Level Encryption
Even if Bluetooth is compromised, data remains safe.

🔍 Bluetooth in Ethical Hacking

Ethical hackers use tools like BlueMaho, BlueBorne, and BTScanner to test vulnerabilities.

Security assessments help organizations secure Bluetooth-enabled IoT and mobile devices.

WiFi:-
WiFi is a wireless networking technology that allows devices to connect to the internet and communicate with each other without physical cables. It uses radio waves to transmit data, typically operating on the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequency bands. WiFi networks are created by wireless routers or access points and can be found in homes, offices, public spaces, and many other locations. The technology follows IEEE 802.11 standards, with newer versions (like WiFi 6 or 802.11ax) offering increased speeds, better performance in crowded areas, and improved energy efficiency. WiFi enables the proliferation of mobile and smart devices, supporting the Internet of Things (IoT) and allowing for greater flexibility and mobility in network connectivity.

Infrared:-
Infrared refers (IR) to a wireless mobile method that transfers data over short-to-mid ranges in order for devices to communicate. It has a longer wavelength than visible light but shorter than radio waves. IR radiation is not visible to the human eye, but only specific electronic sensors and cameras can detect it. Yet infrared has limitations, including a limited range, line-of-sight limitations, limited data transfer rate, susceptibility to interference, limited penetration, and security risks. Hackers still manage to misuse this technology to their advantage.

Infrared misusage
Spoofing devices on the same network. Infrared smart light bulbs can serve as the ideal solution for hackers to spoof all connected devices on one Wi-Fi network. Then, they can cause data leaks or steal confidential data, such as IP addresses.
Hackers can control the infrared wave. Once they intercept the connection, they will be able to constantly monitor the data that two devices share and steal data users store on their computers, such as login credentials, messages, and emails. Such hacking requires advanced technical knowledge and equipment and is therefore less common than other types of attacks.
Steal IoT data. As many IoT devices utilize infrared bulbs, hackers can use them to exploit vulnerabilities and steal sensitive user data.
Monitor security cameras. By intercepting infrared waves, hackers can access the company’s security cameras, which may assist hackers in monitoring the company's actions and entering their security system through the cameras.

Basics of Computer Networking
Computer networking is the practice of connecting computers and devices to share data and resources. It involves the use of protocols like TCP/IP for communication, hardware such as routers and switches for directing traffic, and various network topologies (e.g., star, mesh, bus) for organizing connections. Networks can be categorized by size and scope, from small local area networks (LANs) to wide area networks (WANs) that span large geographical areas. Key concepts include IP addressing, subnetting, DNS for name resolution, and network security measures. Understanding networking basics is crucial for managing data flow, troubleshooting connectivity issues, and ensuring efficient communication in modern computing environments.

The foundations of networking
Switches, routers, and wireless access points are the essential networking basics. Through them, devices connected to your network can communicate with one another and with other networks, like the Internet. Switches, routers, and wireless access points perform very different functions in a network.

Switches
Switches are the foundation of most business networks. A switch acts as a controller, connecting computers, printers, and servers to a network in a building or a campus.

On-premises or cloud-managed? Discover which network switch fits your small business needs.
Explore switches

Switches allow devices on your network to communicate with each other, as well as with other networks, creating a network of shared resources. Through information sharing and resource allocation, switches save money and increase productivity.

There are two basic types of switches to choose from as part of your networking basics: on-premises and cloud-managed.

A managed on-premises switch lets you configure and monitor your LAN, giving you tighter control of your network traffic.
Have a small IT team? A cloud-managed switch can simplify your network management. You get a simple user interface, multisite full-stack management, and automatic updates delivered directly to the switch.
Routers
Routers connect multiple networks together. They also connect computers on those networks to the Internet. Routers enable all networked computers to share a single Internet connection, which saves money. 

A router acts a dispatcher. It analyzes data being sent across a network, chooses the best route for data to travel, and sends it on its way. 

Routers connect your business to the world, protect information from security threats, and can even decide which computers receive priority over others. 

Beyond those basic networking functions, routers come with additional features to make networking easier or more secure. Depending on your security needs, for example, you can choose a router with a firewall, a virtual private network (VPN), or an Internet Protocol (IP) communications system.

Access Points
An access point* allows devices to connect to the wireless network without cables. A wireless network makes it easy to bring new devices online and provides flexible support to mobile workers.

Explore access points

An access point acts like an amplifier for your network. While a router provides the bandwidth, an access point extends that bandwidth so that the network can support many devices, and those devices can access the network from farther away.

But an access point does more than simply extend Wi-Fi. It can also give useful data about the devices on the network, provide proactive security, and serve many other practical purposes.

*Access points support different IEEE standards. Each standard is an amendment that was ratified over time. The standards operate on varying frequencies, deliver different bandwidth, and support different numbers of channels.

Wireless Networking
To create your wireless network, you can choose between three types of deployment: centralized deployment, converged deployment, and cloud-based deployment. Need help figuring out which deployment is best for your business? 
1. Centralized deployment

The most common type of wireless network system, centralized deployments are traditionally used in campuses where buildings and networks are in close proximity. This deployment consolidates the wireless network, which makes upgrades easier and facilitates advanced wireless functionality. Controllers are based on-premises and are installed in a centralized location.  

2. Converged deployment

For small campuses or branch offices, converged deployments offer consistency in wireless and wired connections. This deployment converges wired and wireless on one network device—an access switch—and performs the dual role of both switch and wireless controller.

3. Cloud-based deployment

This system uses the cloud to manage network devices deployed on-premises at different locations. The solution requires Cisco Meraki cloud-managed devices, which provide full visibility of the network through their dashboards. 

What is TCP/IP?

TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol) is a suite of communication protocols used to interconnect network devices on the internet and private networks. It’s not a single protocol, but a family of them, with TCP and IP being the most widely used.

📦 IP (Internet Protocol)

Layer: Network Layer (Layer 3 in OSI)

Purpose: Moves data packets between devices across networks.

Key Features:

Addressing: Uses IP addresses (IPv4 or IPv6) to identify devices.

Packet Routing: Delivers packets from source to destination.

Best-Effort Delivery: Does not guarantee delivery, order, or error-free transmission.

📌 Analogy: IP is like the postal service — it carries a package (data) from one address to another, but doesn’t guarantee it reaches safely or in order.

🔁 TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)

Layer: Transport Layer (Layer 4 in OSI)

Purpose: Ensures reliable communication between applications.

Key Features:

Connection-oriented (3-way handshake)

Reliable delivery (acknowledgments, retransmissions)

Ordered data stream

Flow & Congestion Control

📌 Analogy: TCP is like a courier service — it ensures your package gets delivered, unbroken, and in the right order.

🧩 How TCP and IP Work Together

When you send data (e.g. a web request), here's what happens:

TCP: Breaks data into segments, adds reliability information (sequence numbers, ACKs).

IP: Packages segments into packets and routes them across networks to the destination address.

At the receiver end:

IP: Delivers packets to the right device.

TCP: Reassembles them in order, checks for errors, and delivers to the application.

Operating Systems
Operating systems (OS) are software that manage computer hardware and provide a platform for applications to run. They handle essential functions such as managing memory, processing tasks, controlling input and output devices, and facilitating file management. Key examples include Windows, macOS, Linux, and Unix. Each operating system offers different features and interfaces, tailored to specific user needs or system requirements, from desktop computing to server management and embedded systems.
An operating system is a software component of a computer system that is responsible for the management of various activities of the computer and the sharing of computer resources. It hosts several applications that run on a computer and handles the operations of computer hardware. Users and application programs access the services offered by the operating systems, by means of system calls and application programming interfaces. Users interact with a computer operating system through Command Line Interfaces (CLIs) or Graphical User Interfaces known as GUIs. In short, an operating system enables user interaction with computer systems by acting as an interface between users or application programs and the computer hardware. Here is an overview of the different types of operating systems.

Real-time Operating System: It is a multitasking operating system that aims at executing real-time applications. Real-time operating systems often use specialized scheduling algorithms so that they can achieve a deterministic nature of behavior. The main object of real-time operating systems is their quick and predictable response to events. They either have an event-driven design or a time-sharing one. An event-driven system switches between tasks based of their priorities while time-sharing operating systems switch tasks based on clock interrupts.

Multi-user and Single-user Operating Systems: Computer operating systems of this type allow multiple users to access a computer system simultaneously. Time-sharing systems can be classified as multi-user systems as they enable a multiple user access to a computer through time sharing. Single-user operating systems, as opposed to a multi-user operating system, are usable by only one user at a time. Being able to have multiple accounts on a Windows operating system does not make it a multi-user system. Rather, only the network administrator is the real user. But for a Unix-like operating system, it is possible for two users to log in at a time and this capability of the OS makes it a multi-user operating system.

Multi-tasking and Single-tasking Operating Systems: When a single program is allowed to run at a time, the system is grouped under the single-tasking system category, while in case the operating system allows for execution of multiple tasks at a time, it is classified as a multi-tasking operating system. Multi-tasking can be of two types namely, pre-emptive or co-operative. In pre-emptive multitasking, the operating system slices the CPU time and dedicates one slot to each of the programs. Unix-like operating systems such as Solaris and Linux support pre-emptive multitasking. If you are aware of the multi-threading terminology, you can consider this type of multi-tasking as similar to interleaved multi-threading. Cooperative multitasking is achieved by relying on each process to give time to the other processes in a defined manner. This kind of multi-tasking is similar to the idea of block multi-threading in which one thread runs till it is blocked by some other event. MS Windows prior to Windows 95 used to support cooperative multitasking.

Distributed Operating System: An operating system that manages a group of independent computers and makes them appear to be a single computer is known as a distributed operating system. The development of networked computers that could be linked and made to communicate with each other, gave rise to distributed computing. Distributed computations are carried out on more than one machine. When computers in a group work in cooperation, they make a distributed system.

Embedded System: The operating systems designed for being used in embedded computer systems are known as embedded operating systems. They are designed to operate on small machines like PDAs with less autonomy. They are able to operate with a limited number of resources. They are very compact and extremely efficient by design.

Mobile Operating System: Though not a functionally distinct kind of operating system, mobile OS is definitely an important mention in the list of operating system types. A mobile OS controls a mobile device and its design supports wireless communication and mobile applications. It has built-in support for mobile multimedia formats. Tablet PCs and smartphones run on mobile operating systems.

Blackberry OS, Google’s Android and Apple’s iOS are some of the most known names of mobile operating systems.

Batch Processing and Interactive Systems: Batch processing refers to execution of computer programs in ‘batches’ without manual intervention. In batch processing systems, programs are collected, grouped and processed on a later date. There is no prompting the user for inputs as input data are collected in advance for future processing. Input data are collected and processed in batches, hence the name batch processing. IBM’s z/OS has batch processing capabilities. As against this, interactive operating requires user intervention. The process cannot be executed in the user’s absence.

Online and Offline Processing: In online processing of data, the user remains in contact with the computer and processes are executed under control of the computer’s central processing unit. When processes are not executed under direct control of the CPU, the processing is referred to as offline. Let’s take the example of batch processing. Here, the batching or grouping of data can be done without user and CPU intervention; it can be done offline. But the actual process execution may happen under direct control of the processor, that is online.

Operating systems contribute to simplifying human interaction with the computer hardware. They are responsible for linking application programs with the hardware, thus achieving easy user access to computers. Ever imagined a computer without an OS? It wouldn’t be so user-friendly then!

Linux:-

Linux is an open-source UNIX-based operating system. The main component of the Linux operating system is Linux kernel. It is developed to provide low-cost or free operating system service to personal system users, which includes an X-window system, Emacs editor, IP/TCP GUI, etc.

What is Linux? (Easy Explanation)

Linux is an operating system (OS) — like Windows or macOS — but it's free, open-source, and used everywhere: computers, servers, phones, routers, TVs, cars, etc.

But more precisely:

✔ Linux = The Kernel

The kernel is the core part of the operating system.

It handles:

hardware (CPU, RAM, disk),

processes,

memory,

networking, etc.

✔ GNU/Linux = The Full OS

Most people say “Linux” when they actually mean the complete system that includes:

the Linux kernel

GNU tools

other system utilities

desktop environments

package managers

These complete systems are called Linux distributions.
Linux distribution
A Linux system package, known as a distribution, consists of multiple Linux distributions available for different computing needs. Linux distribution is developed using a set of software based on compatibility with the Linux core kernel, using which Linux-based operations in different systems, such as personal systems, embedded systems, etc. There are around 600 distributions available.

Each distribution has specialized packages installed to support specific tasks. This means you can download software related to your field of work using a Linux distribution.

Examples of Linux Distributions

Popular ones include:

Ubuntu

Debian

Fedora

Red Hat Enterprise Linux

Arch Linux

Kali Linux

CentOS / Rocky / AlmaLinux

Each one uses the same kernel but different tools and flavors.

Linux Architecture (Easy Diagram + Explanation)

Linux follows a layered architecture. Think of it like a cake with multiple layers, each doing a specific job.

+---------------------------+
|     Applications          |
+---------------------------+
|     Shell (CLI)          |
+---------------------------+
|     System Libraries      |
+---------------------------+
|     Linux Kernel          |
+---------------------------+
|     Hardware              |
+---------------------------+
1. Hardware

The physical components:

CPU

RAM

Hard disk / SSD

Network card

Keyboard, mouse, screen

Everything at the bottom.

2. Linux Kernel (The Core)

This is the heart of Linux.
The kernel controls all communication between software and hardware.

The kernel manages:

Memory

Processes

Filesystems

Device drivers

Networking

Security

3. System Libraries

These are functions that programs use to talk to the kernel.

The most important one:

glibc (GNU C Library)

Example: When a program wants to open a file, it uses system libraries → libraries talk to kernel → kernel opens it.

4. Shell (Command Interpreter)

The shell is what you type commands into:

bash

zsh

fish

sh

It takes your commands (ls, cd, cp), interprets them, and sends instructions to the kernel.

5. Applications

Everything you run:

Firefox

VS Code

Docker

apt, yum, pacman

Python, Java, Go programs

Custom scripts

Applications → System Libraries → Kernel → Hardware

Short Summary :-
Layer	What it does
Hardware	Physical components
Kernel	Controls everything; talks to hardware
System Libraries	Provide functions to communicate with kernel
Shell	Lets you interact with the OS
Applications	Programs you run

Networking Knowledge:-
Networking knowledge encompasses understanding the principles, technologies, and protocols involved in connecting and managing networks. Key areas include:

Network Protocols-
Network protocols are standardized rules and formats that govern how devices exchange data over a network, acting as a common language (like HTTP for web, SMTP for email) to ensure different hardware and software can communicate reliably, handling data formatting, addressing, error-checking, and sequencing for smooth, efficient transfer, essential for the internet and local networks to function. 
How Do Network Protocols Work?
Network protocols work by dividing communication tasks into layers, where each layer performs a specific function to ensure successful data transmission.
>Communication is based on the OSI model, which consists of 7 layers.
>Each OSI layer uses specific protocols to perform its task.
>Data moves layer by layer from sender to receiver.
>Example: Internet Protocol (IP) operates at the Network Layer and handles routing using source and destination addresses.
>Layered communication improves reliability, scalability, and troubleshooting.

Types of Network Protocols-
In most cases, communication across a network like the Internet uses the OSI model. The OSI model has a total of seven layers. Secured connections, network management, and network communication are the three main tasks that the network protocol performs. The purpose of protocols is to link different devices.

The protocols can be broadly classified into three major categories:

Network Communication
Network Management
Network Security

1. Network Communication
Communication protocols are really important for the functioning of a network. They are so crucial that it is not possible to have computer networks without them. These protocols formally set out the rules and formats through which data is transferred. These protocols handle syntax, semantics, error detection, synchronization, and authentication. Below mentioned are some network communication protocol:

Hypertext Transfer Protocol(HTTP)
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is an application layer (Layer 7) protocol used for transferring hypertext data between systems on the World Wide Web.

Works on a client-server model.
Used for loading web pages in browsers.
Stateless protocol (does not store session information).
Most data exchange on the web uses HTTP.
Less secure unless used with HTTPS.

Transmission Control Protocol(TCP)
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a connection-oriented transport layer protocol that provides reliable and ordered data delivery.

Establishes a connection before data transmission.
Uses sequenced acknowledgments to ensure reliability.
Provides error detection and flow control.
Guarantees data delivery in the correct order.
Used in email, FTP, web browsing, and streaming services.

User Datagram Protocol(UDP)
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is a connectionless transport layer protocol that provides fast but unreliable data transmission.

Does not establish a connection before sending data.
No error recovery, flow control, or reliability mechanisms.
Faster than TCP due to minimal overhead.
Suitable where speed is more important than accuracy.
Used in video streaming, online gaming, multicasting, and broadcasting.

Border Gateway Protocol(BGP)
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is a routing protocol used to exchange routing information between autonomous systems on the Internet.

Controls how data packets travel across multiple networks.
Used between large networks operated by different organizations.
Connects LANs to other LANs across the Internet.
Ensures efficient and scalable Internet routing.
Plays a critical role in global Internet connectivity.

Address Resolution Protocol(ARP)
Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) maps logical IP addresses to physical MAC addresses within a local network.

Used in local area networks (LANs).
Maintains an ARP cache for IP-to-MAC mappings.
Helps devices identify each other on a network.
Essential for packet delivery within a LAN.
Operates between the Network and Data Link layers.

Internet Protocol(IP)
Internet Protocol (IP) is a network layer protocol responsible for addressing and routing data packets across networks.

Sends data from source host to destination host.
Uses IP addresses for device identification.
Supports packet routing across different networks.
Connectionless and best-effort delivery protocol.
Forms the foundation of the Internet.

Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol(DHCP)
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is a network management protocol used to automatically configure devices on IP networks.

Automatically assigns IP addresses to devices.
Provides configuration details such as subnet mask, gateway, and DNS.
Reduces manual network configuration errors.
Enables devices to access services like DNS and NTP.
Simplifies network administration and management.

2. Network Management 
These protocols assist in describing the procedures and policies that are used in monitoring, maintaining, and managing the computer network. These protocols also help in communicating these requirements across the network to ensure stable communication. Network management protocols can also be used for troubleshooting connections between a host and a client.

Internet Control Message Protocol(ICMP)
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) is a network layer (Layer 3) protocol used by network devices to send error messages and operational information.

Reports network errors and congestion issues.
Used for diagnostic purposes such as ping and traceroute.
Helps detect unreachable hosts and timeouts.
Does not transfer user data directly.
Essential for network troubleshooting.

Simple Network Management Protocol(SNMP)
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) is an application layer (Layer 7) protocol used to manage and monitor network devices on an IP network.

Used for network monitoring and management.
Consists of three main components: SNMP Manager, SNMP Agent, Managed Device.
SNMP agents collect and send network information to the manager.
Helps monitor performance, detect faults, and troubleshoot issues.
Widely used in enterprise networks.

Gopher
Gopher is a file retrieval protocol used to search, retrieve, and manage files stored on remote systems.

Organizes files in a hierarchical (menu-based) structure.
Provides descriptive information for easy file retrieval.
One of the earliest Internet protocols.
Largely obsolete and replaced by HTTP and FTP.

File Transfer Protocol(FTP)
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is a client-server protocol used to transfer files between a local system and a remote host.

Allows uploading and downloading of files.
Operates over TCP/IP.
Commonly used for file sharing and website management.
Supports authentication using username and password.
Less secure unless used with encryption.

Post Office Protocol(POP3)
Post Office Protocol version 3 (POP3) is an email protocol used by mail clients to retrieve emails from a mail server.

Downloads emails from the server to the local device.
Emails are usually deleted from the server after download.
Uses TCP/IP for communication.
Suitable for single-device email access.
Simple but less flexible than IMAP.

Telnet
Telnet is a remote access protocol that allows users to connect to and control a remote system.

Enables remote command execution.
Operates in a client-server model.
Transmits data in plain text (not secure).
Mostly replaced by SSH due to security concerns.
Used mainly for testing and legacy systems.

3. Network Security
These protocols secure the data in passage over a network. These protocols also determine how the network secures data from any unauthorized attempts to extract or review data. These protocols make sure that no unauthorized devices, users, or services can access the network data. Primarily, these protocols depend on encryption to secure data.

Secure Socket Layer(SSL)
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is a network security protocol used to protect sensitive data and secure communication over the Internet.

Encrypts data transferred between communicating systems.
Supports both client-to-server and server-to-server communication.
Prevents unauthorized access and data interception.
Ensures confidentiality of sensitive information.
Forms the foundation for secure web communication.

Hypertext Transfer Protocol(HTTPS)
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) is the secure version of HTTP that ensures encrypted communication between a web browser and a web server.

Uses SSL/TLS to secure data transmission.
Protects user data from interception and tampering.
Commonly used for secure web browsing.
Ensures data confidentiality and integrity.
Indicated by a padlock icon in web browsers.

Transport Layer Security(TLS)
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a security protocol designed to provide privacy, data integrity, and authentication over the Internet.

Encrypts data during transmission.
Verifies data integrity to detect tampering.
Authenticates communicating parties.
Widely used in web applications, email services, and VoIP.
Successor and more secure version of SSL.

Some Other Protocols:

Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) is an email protocol used to retrieve and manage emails directly from a mail server.

Allows users to view and manage emails without downloading them permanently.
Emails remain stored on the mail server.
Enables access to the same mailbox from multiple devices.
Supports folder organization and synchronization.
More flexible than POP3.

Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) is a signaling protocol used to initiate, manage, and terminate real-time communication sessions.

Used in voice, video, and messaging applications.
Establishes communication sessions between users.
Manages session setup, modification, and termination.
Commonly used in VoIP and video conferencing.
Works with RTP to transmit media data.

Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP)
Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) is used to transmit audio and video data over IP networks in real time.

Supports real-time multimedia communication.
Used along with SIP for audio and video transmission.
Provides sequence numbering and timestamping.
Ensures timely delivery of streaming media.
Widely used in video calls and live streaming.

Point To Point Tunnelling Protocol (PPTP)
Point-to-Point Tunneling Protocol (PPTP) is a protocol used to implement Virtual Private Networks (VPNs).

Encapsulates PPP frames inside IP datagrams.
Enables secure data transmission over public networks.
Used for remote access VPN connections.
Simple to configure but less secure than modern VPN protocols.

Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP)
Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP) is a lightweight and simplified version of FTP used for basic file transfer.

Uses UDP instead of TCP.
Provides minimal functionality and no authentication.
Commonly used for boot files and firmware updates.
Faster but less secure than FTP.

Resource Location Protocol (RLP)
Resource Location Protocol (RLP) is used to locate and assign network resources to users.

Helps locate resources such as printers, servers, and devices.
Uses broadcast queries to find available resources.
Supports efficient resource discovery on a network.
Useful in distributed network environments.

What is OSI Model? - Layers of OSI Model
The OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) Model is a set of rules that explains how different computer systems communicate over a network. OSI Model was developed by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). The OSI Model consists of 7 layers and each layer has specific functions and responsibilities. This layered approach makes it easier for different devices and technologies to work together.

Protocols Used in the OSI Layers:
We’ll describe OSI layers “top down” from the application layer that directly serves the end user, down to the physical layer.
7. Application Layer-
The Application Layer serves as the interface between the end-user applications and the underlying network services. This layer provides protocols and services that are directly utilized by end-user applications to communicate across the network. Key functionalities of the Application Layer include resource sharing, remote file access, and network management.

Examples of protocols operating at the Application Layer include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) for web browsing, File Transfer Protocol (FTP) for file transfers, Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) for email services, and Domain Name System (DNS) for resolving domain names to IP addresses. These protocols ensure that user applications can effectively communicate with each other and with servers over a network.

6. Presentation Layer-
The Presentation Layer, also known as the syntax layer, is responsible for translating data between the application layer and the network format. It ensures that data sent from the application layer of one system is readable by the application layer of another system. This layer handles data formatting, encryption, and compression, facilitating interoperability between different systems.

One of the key roles of the Presentation Layer is data translation and code conversion. It transforms data into a format that the application layer can understand. For example, it may convert data from ASCII to EBCDIC. It also includes encryption protocols to ensure data security during transmission and compression protocols to reduce the amount of data for efficient transmission

5. Session Layer-
The Session Layer manages and controls the connections between computers. It establishes, maintains, and terminates connections, ensuring that data exchanges occur efficiently and in an organized manner.
These services enable reliable communication, especially in complex network environments.

4. Transport Layer-
The Transport Layer provides end-to-end communication services for applications. It ensures complete data transfer, error recovery, and flow control between hosts. This layer segments and reassembles data for efficient transmission and provides reliability with error detection and correction mechanisms.

Protocols at this layer include Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). TCP is connection-oriented and ensures reliable data transfer with error checking and flow control, making it suitable for applications like web browsing and email. UDP is connectionless, offering faster, though less reliable, transmission, suitable for applications like video streaming and online gaming.

3. Network Layer-
The Network Layer is responsible for data routing, forwarding, and addressing. It determines the best physical path for data to reach its destination based on network conditions, the priority of service, and other factors. This layer manages logical addressing through IP addresses and handles packet forwarding.

Key protocols at this layer include the Internet Protocol (IP), which is important for routing and addressing, Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) for diagnostic and error-reporting purposes, and routing protocols like Routing Information Protocol (RIP) that manage the routing of data across networks.

2. Data Link Layer-
The Data Link Layer is responsible for node-to-node data transfer and error detection and correction. It ensures that data is transmitted to the correct device on a local network segment. This layer manages MAC (Media Access Control) addresses and is divided into two sublayers: Logical Link Control (LLC) and Media Access Control (MAC).

Protocols and technologies at this layer include Ethernet, which defines the rules for data transmission over local area networks (LANs), and Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) for direct connections between two network nodes. It also includes mechanisms for detecting and possibly correcting errors that may occur in the Physical Layer.

1. Physical Layer-
The Physical Layer is responsible for the physical connection between devices. It defines the hardware elements involved in the network, including cables, switches, and other physical components. This layer also specifies the electrical, optical, and radio characteristics of the network.

Functions of the Physical Layer include the modulation, bit synchronization, and transmission of raw binary data over the physical medium. Technologies such as Fiber Optics and Wi-Fi operate at this layer, ensuring that the data physically moves from one device to another in the network.

Network Ports:
Now a port is not a physical connection,  it's a logical connection that is used by  programs and services to exchange information. It specifically determines which program or service  on a computer or server that is going to be used.  Whether that is pulling up a web page, using  an FTP service, accessing email and so on. And ports have a unique number that identifies  them. The number ranges from 0 - 65535. 

Common Ports and their Uses-
For example some common ports are port 80 and  443 which are used for web pages. Port number 21  is used for FTP. And port number 25 is used for  email. A port number is always associated with an IP address. An IP address is a numeric address.  It's an identifier for a computer or device on  a network. Every device has to have an  IP address for communication purposes.  

Now in simple terms, what does this all mean? So  as an example, let's take a very common port that just about everyone uses every day and that is  port number 80. Port 80 is associated with HTTP which is web pages. Whenever you visit a web  page from your computer, you're using port 80  

Port Numbers-
port numbers range from 0 - 65535. And they are assigned by an organization called the  Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. And these 65,000 port numbers are broken down into three  categories. 
Port numbers from 0 - 1023 are called system or well-known ports. These are common ports that most people use every day. And I've mentioned a few of these ports already, such as port 80, 443,  25, and 21. 
Port numbers from 1024 - 49151 are called user or registered ports. These are ports  that can be registered by companies and developers.
Port numbers from 49152 - 65535 these are called dynamic or private ports.These are client-side ports that are free  to use. These are the port numbers that your computer assigns temporarily to itself during  a session, for example when viewing a web page.









